---
layout: post
title: "Airbus E-Fan"
author_github: sachitkrishnan
date: 2017-09-04 10:00:30
image: '/assets/img/'
description: 'A post explaining an environmental approach taken by Airbus'
tags:
- Aviation
- Environment
categories:
- Piston
github_username: 'sachitkrishnan'
---

## The Airbus E-Fan Project

For over a hundred years - and certainly many to follow, the aircraft
industry, for the most part, has relied upon combustion based engines,
ranging from the long-forgotten piston-prop through the state of the art
Turbofan. Yet, no matter what the degree of advancement is in the field
of such engines, what’s guaranteed is an ever-increasing toll of CO2 and
other greenhouse gases.

The intuitive solution for sustainable development, as in nearly all
domains of power generation, especially in transportation, is
electricity. Presently, every mode of transport (save for aviation)
employs at least a certain level of technological know-how of the
utilisation of electrical energy to power any system that would
otherwise use energy from combustion of fossil fuels.

However, no such concrete technology in the aircraft domain is in
existence yet, due primarily to the commendable figures of power output
and efficiencies of the contemporary combustion engines. But then,
electric engines were never invented with the aim of outperforming the
existing engines (though with the current trends of R&D, such a thought
could be realised), but to rather mimic them without using non-renewable
resources and reducing greenhouse emissions in parallel.

The E-Fan Programme of Airbus is one such initiative that aims to
accelerate developments towards environment-friendly aviation. The E-Fan
was initially designed specifically to utilise electric power. As a
second step, E-Fan was transformed into an updated ‘Plus’ version with a
hybrid configuration for longer flight endurance. E-Fan Plus – which
debuted during the summer of 2016 – incorporates an internal combustion
engine as a range extender in addition to the aircraft’s on-board
lithium-ion batteries.

These two propulsion system configurations – and ongoing innovation –
highlight the aircraft’s role as a technology demonstrator that allows
the company to make important advances on its electric aircraft roadmap.

The E-Thrust concept with Rolls Royce Airbus has strategically partnered
with Rolls-Royce for the E-Thrust concept study. This research is
focused on delivering lower fuel consumption, fewer emissions and less
noise for future aircraft through a hybrid/electrical distributed
propulsion system. Building on E-Fan’s all-electric power system, the
E-Thrust concept features electrically-driven fans distributed in
clusters along the wing span and an advanced gas power unit to provide
electrical power for the fans and for recharging the energy storage
system (potentially high-density batteries) depending on the phase of
flight. Electrical energy management throughout the flight profile For
takeoff and climb, electrical power is generated from both the energy
storage system and gas power unit to provide peak power to the fans.
During cruise, the gas power unit powers the fans and recharges the
energy storage system. In the aircraft’s descent, the gas power unit is
switched off – with no power provided to the fans, and the energy
storage system producing the energy for on-board systems. In a second
phase of descent, the fans will be used as “windmills” to generate
electrical power to re-charge the energy storage system. Finally, for
landing the gas power unit is restarted, offering low levels of power
for propulsion as a safety measure during this phase of flight.

